The Project Gutenberg eBook of The real Mackay
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The real Mackay

Author: Donald A. Mackenzie

Release date: March 6, 2025 [eBook #75546]

Language: English

Original publication: GB:

Credits: Carol Brown, Mairi and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (National Library of Scotland)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE REAL MACKAY ***


_Reprinted from “The Dunedin Magazine”_




                           THE REAL MACKAY

                       (_All Rights Reserved_)

                             ONE ACT PLAY

                        BY DONALD A. MACKENZIE




                             _Characters_

     WIDOW MACKAY, _tenant of Balree Croft_.
     MÀIRI[1] MACKAY, _her daughter, a domestic servant_.
     “SANDY” SPEEDWELL, _artist and poet, of Edinburgh_.
     MRS SPEEDWELL, _his mother_.


SCENE: _The “best room” in a crofter’s cottage in the Scottish
Highlands. To the left a small open window, round which honeysuckle
clings and blooms, affords a glimpse of a blue loch, softly screened
by the drooping branches of a silver birch, and glistening in bright
sunshine. Beside the window Màiri Mackay sits knitting a white
shawl. A folding table, with the leaves down, occupies the centre
of the room and is covered with a Mackay tartan plaid. Upon it
stands a dark blue bowl filled with wild roses. Widow Mackay sits
to the right, at her spinning wheel, between the table and a wide,
open fire-place. Peat smoulders in the grate. To the left of the
fire-place is an “easy chair” (a plain arm-chair with a cushion),
and to the right a nursing chair with short legs; a stool is tilted
in front on a deerskin rug. Against the wall, between the little
window and a bedroom door, is a dark mahogany chest of drawers, on
which lies a bulky family Bible between two gaudy vases. Three chairs
are ranged against the wall to the left, and the floor is covered
with flowery waxcloth, brilliantly new. The walls are adorned with
framed portraits of John Knox, John Bunyan, William Ewart Gladstone,
and a Free Church minister. On the high mantelpiece squat two white
porcelain dogs with black noses, and above it is a set of bagpipes. A
“wag-at-the-wa” clock ticks leisurely to the right of the fireplace._

TIME: _Early afternoon: a sunny day in late June._


  WIDOW (_stops spinning and looks towards her daughter over her
       glasses_). You’ll be sitting in a draught, Màiri. Shut the
       window or you will maybe catch a cheel[2]--you that looks so
       delicate.

  MÀIRI. Oh! there’s no fear of me, mother. If you won’t be minding,
       I would rather have the window open. I love to breathe the
       fresh air from the loch. (_Takes a deep breath._) It’s so
       refreshing after being in a stuffy city, and the honeysuckle
       smells so sweet. How quiet it is here; you can listen to the
       quietness, so to speak.

  WIDOW. Well, well, my treasure, have your own way with it. Balree
       is indeed a sweet place, and God’s world is very beautiful.
       (_Stops spinning._) Màiri, that honeysuckle was planted out
       there by your dear father, nineteen years ago, on the very day
       you came into the world. He’ll be at his rest now three years
       come Martinmas, and every summer his beautiful flower will be
       growing and spreading and blooming. The smell of it goes to
       my heart like a sweet thought of him. (_Sighs and resumes her
       work at the spinning wheel, drawing out a thread and adjusting
       it._) It’s your own father that would be proud of you, Màiri,
       if he was still with us, but the Lord appointed otherwise.
       (_Sighs._) His will be done. (_Goes on spinning._)

  [_Màiri rises from her chair, draws a tendril of honeysuckle
       through the window and smells it: then she plucks a blossom
       and puts it in her blouse. Musing, she leans her elbow on the
       window, chin on hand, gazing towards the loch. Her mother
       stops spinning, looks up and watches her daughter for a few
       seconds in silence._]

  WIDOW. You are very quiet, Màiri. How you have changed!

  MÀIRI. I was only thinking to myself--just thinking a little.

  WIDOW. It’s me that sees a great difference in you--you that used
       to be such a cheery lassie, always laughing and teasing one
       and making the jokes. Many times, when you’re away, I will be
       smiling here my lone self, thinking o’ the things you used
       to be saying and doing. Now, I’ll notice, and I canna’ help
       noticing it, that you’re changed so much. I suppose it’s the
       city that does it. You’ll have many things, no doubt, to be
       thinking over, and maybe, yes, maybe, you’re feeling just a
       little dull, now, in this quiet place.... You’ll often be
       sitting thinking to yourself in that way. Surely nosing[3]
       will be troubling you, m’eudail[4]?

  [_Màiri does not answer. She sits down, hangs her head and resumes
       knitting. Her mother rises, grasping her chin between her
       fingers, a look of concern on her face; goes over to the
       window and sits besides her daughter._]

  WIDOW. And something is troubling you, Màiri, my own. You canna’
       hide it from me. There will be tears in your eyes, Ochone!
       what will you be hiding in the deep heart of you? You
       shouldn’t be hiding anysing at all, at all, from me, your own
       mother.

  [_Màiri shakes her head, takes out her handkerchief and dries her
       eyes._]

  WIDOW (_very softly_). You are all I have left in this world--your
       father dead, your brother killed in the war in a foreign
       land far away. It would break my heart to think you would
       be keeping anysing from me. What is it? Tell me (_strokes the
       girl’s hair_), dove of my heart! my fair love!... Màiri
       (_entreatingly_).

  MÀIRI (_resuming her knitting_). It was only a foolish thought
       (_pause_)--a thought about one I shouldn’t maybe be thinking
       of, now that I’m here.

  WIDOW. Ah! has he--has _he_ ... turned false to you, now?

  MÀIRI (_quickly_). Well, not what you would call false, not that
       altogether.

  WIDOW. A lovers’ quarrel, no doubt. You’re young, you’re young, but
       the young heart can feel sore. I mind well. I was once like
       you, Màiri. Your father and I had once a lover’s quarrel. But
       it came all right. Lovers’ quarrels are sometimes sweet to
       remember afterwards.

  MÀIRI. It’s not what you would call a quarrel either. But we’ve
       parted--parted for ever. But don’t be worrying, mother, I’ll
       maybe no’ be caring so much as you would think.

  WIDOW. Well, well, it’s the way of the world. Maybe you’ll change
       your mind yet. Maybe you wass just a little bit to blame
       yourself, now, eh? I wouldn’t say you wass, Màiri, no, no. But
       girls--bonnie girls like yourself, my dove, will sometimes
       be doing things and saying things they’ll no’ quite intend
       altogether, and then they’ll be thinking afterwards that
       it’s maybe a pity it wasn’t otherwise.... Is he a good lad,
       Màiri, steady at his work, no drinking, and always attending
       the church? Is he what you would call handsome, now,--big and
       manly like your father?

  MÀIRI (_smiling_). No doubt he would have pleased you. If looks
       were everything, you’d be quite satisfied. He’s a gentleman in
       every way.

  WIDOW. A Highland lad, too, maybe, and of a good clan?

  MÀIRI. Well, no’ exactly what you would call Highland; but his
       grandfather was a Ross and he’s proud of it.

  WIDOW. So well he might be. There were some fine Rosses, although
       they were never like the Mackays, or my own clan, the great
       clan Donald. I would like to see your young man, Màiri. You’ll
       make it up all right with him yet, eh?

  MÀIRI. No, no; it’s all past. He’s fickle, mother--a poppy in the
       corn--a butterfly--one you would maybe like to look at, but
       not to depend on--changeable as the wind, and cruel without
       knowing it--aye! (_Sighs._) But don’t be speaking about him.
       It’s time I was beginning to forget there’s such a one in the
       world.

  WIDOW. Aye, so.... (_Looking through the window_). There’s Sandy
       coming.

  MÀIRI (_rising quickly in alarm_). Who--who?

  WIDOW. It’s only Sandy, oor neighbour. He’s coming to sow the
       turnips for me. Ah! Màiri, the neighbours will be very good to
       me since your father’s death. Every one of them comes to do
       his share o’ work on the croft and keep a roof above my head.
       I’ll better be speaking to Sandy. (_Exit._)

  MÀIRI. Sandy.... Why should I have thought it was him? He does
       not know where I live, and, besides, he wouldn’t come if he
       knew, except maybe to wound my heart deeper without knowing
       what he was doing.... Why did I tell mother? I can’t explain
       everything to her. She cannot understand. Did Sandy’s mother
       not tell me that he is not in my station of life, and that
       she would be disgraced if he married a servant--a servant in
       his mother’s house. Oh! it’s her that wounded my pride--her
       thinking she was better than me! a shopkeeper’s wife (as if
       that were something great) and me a real Mackay, with lords
       and bards and great chiefs in my line.... Oh! if I only had
       the money, she wouldn’t despise me so. But what’s money?
       Money will not make one a lady.... I must forget, forget what
       was--forget Sandy and his mother and the rest.

  WIDOW (_enters_). Sandy was asking when you will be going away.
       (_Sighs._) I said I wasn’t very sure. He’s wondering you
       haven’t been down to see his wife who was so ill last winter.
       Haste you, my dear, and be calling on her at once. She has
       been a good kind friend to me, Màiri.

  MÀIRI. I’ll go down just now, mother. But don’t be speaking about
       me going away. (_Smiles._) I have made up my mind to stay here
       with you always after this. You’re getting old and canna’ be
       left alone.

  WIDOW. I wish you could aye be here, as you say. (_Sighs._) But
       we’re too poor, Màiri. It canna’ be. We must bear our burdens
       in this world though our hearts should be breaking.

  MÀIRI. I have a plan, mother, that will bring us money, and I’m
       going to give you a little surprise.

  WIDOW. How can you make money here, lassie? Now, tell me that.

  MÀIRI. Keeping visitors. Letting the house. I’ve thought of it
       for a long time, and that’s why I brought you things for the
       house--the waxcloth, the new blankets, and the rest.

  WIDOW (_amazed_). Keeping veesitors?

  MÀIRI. I saw how it was done last summer when we were holidaying
       near Oban. Oh! the people in the west are clever at making the
       money in the summer.

  WIDOW. Don’t tell me they’re cleverer in the west than in the
       north. Who ever heard of such a thing? They haven’t such land
       as our land.

  MÀIRI. I know a widow near Oban--a Macdougall she is. Her son has
       a bicycle and her daughter has a piano. The croft is a poorer
       croft than our croft, and they have a slated roof, a porch at
       the door, registered grates, water taps in the kitchen, and a
       carpet in the best room.

  WIDOW. How did they manage it?

  MÀIRI. The visitors, of course.

  WIDOW. The veesitors!

  MÀIRI. Ailie Macdougall is a nice girl, and she hasn’t to go to
       service the whole year round like me. You see, they get so
       much money from the visitors that it keeps them and pays the
       rent.

  WIDOW. I’m sure it’s very good of the veesitors. But, Màiri, I
       wouldn’t be beholden to anybody. I wouldn’t take charity
       money, although I’m a poor widow, from any stranger, man or
       woman, however grand. No, no I couldn’t think of it.

  MÀIRI. You don’t understand. The money is payment for rent and
       attendance. We’ll let the house to visitors or take in
       lodgers, and charge maybe £12 a month with attendance.

  WIDOW. But we canna’ afford to slate the roof and get a piano and
       all the rest. You couldn’t ask gentry to stay here, Màiri.

  MÀIRI. You’re wrong there, mother. It’s fashionable for the city
       gentry to be staying now for holidays in “crofters’ cottages,”
       as they call them. They think houses like this are most
       artistic. They’re quite right too. This is a finer house than
       any in a city--not so grand, of course, but more sweet and
       homely in every way. The gentry are beginning to know that.
       Oh! mother, you would be surprised to see how they imitate
       us.... In the house where I was serving they had a spinning
       wheel and a three-legged pot in the drawing-room, cruisies in
       the dining-room, horn spoons and wooden ladles, and old plates
       and bowls here and there and everywhere as ornaments. They
       will pay a lot of money for things we will just be throwing
       away.... Maybe they’ll buy the old bagpipes. (_Laughs._)

  WIDOW. My grandfather’s bagpipes--the bagpipes of a Gaelic bard?
       No, no; I’d sooner starve than part with a thing in this
       house. Everything is covered with memories of my heart.

  MÀIRI. I spoke to the Postmaster about letting the house. I wanted
       to give you a surprise.... I’ll better be going to see Sandy’s
       wife. Now, mother, if the visitors call when I’m out, you’ll
       keep them speaking till I return. Don’t take the first offer.
       Ask the highest terms you can. (_Draws a knitted shawl over
       her head._) Now I’ll be off.

  WIDOW. Will you not be putting on your feather hat and your Sunday
       costume? The like o’ that hat is no’ to be seen in the glen.

  MÀIRI. The shawl is sweeter. If I put on my best hat, people would
       think I was getting too proud. (_Exit._)

  WIDOW (_sits at spinning wheel_). It’s a queer notion the lassie
       will have got into her head. But I must humour her. And so
       she’s got a lad; and him and her have had a cast out. Poor
       lass! That’ll no’ last long. Blessings be on the dear heart of
       her! Any lad _my_ Màiri would keep company with must be a good
       lad, and any lad that once set his eyes on _my_ Màiri will no’
       be wanting to lose her. The treasure!... It’s myself would be
       thankful to see her married decently and well.... I’m getting
       old, as her dear self would be saying. (_Sighs._) My time will
       no’ be long now.

  [_Enter Mrs Speedwell, attired in summer costume. Of middle age.
       Has come from Edinburgh and is staying at the village hotel,
       a mile distant from Balree Croft. Looks at the widow, who is
       spinning._]

  MRS S. (_aside_). What a charming picture! How Sandy would love to
       paint her! This is the very house for Sandy.... (_Aloud_) Good
       afternoon, Mrs Mackay (_smiles_)--you’re Mrs Mackay?

  WIDOW. Pardon me, mem, I wass busy, and wouldn’t be seeing you.
       Would you kindly sit down?

  MRS S. Thank you. (_Sits down._)

  WIDOW. Will you be feeling the draught? I’ll--I’ll shut the window.

  MRS S. (_aside_). A charming woman. (_Aloud._) No thank you.
       The air is so delicately fresh here. This is a delightful
       district, Mrs Mackay.

  WIDOW. It is very kind of you to be saying that. Balree has been
       my home for five and twenty years. When my man took me here I
       thought it the sweetest place on earth, next to my own glen,
       of course, and I’ll be content to end my days in his house,
       the Lord willing.

  MRS S. The Postmaster tells me you have rooms to let. My son is
       anxious to stay in the country, and I think your cottage will
       suit him. He doesn’t know I am here; the Postmaster wired to
       him yesterday saying he could get suitable rooms. My son wants
       to work in the Highlands during the summer and autumn.

  WIDOW. To work here? Well (_pause_), it’s not easy to find work
       here. What will his business be?

  MRS. S. Oh! he’s a painter.

  WIDOW. Indeet! Well, (_pause_) he will not get very much painting
       to do in this poor place, unless, maybe, of course, at the
       shooting lodge, but I’m afraid that it was painted in the
       spring.

  MRS S. (_laughing_). He’s not a house painter, but an artist. He
       paints pictures, you understand.

  WIDOW. Oh! yes, yes; I see, I see. I’ll understand.... I’ll be
       noticing some gentlemen drawing wonderful pictures here about
       in the summer, and some ladies also. And very clever they are,
       too. It’s a gift--yes, a great gift, just like making songs
       and playing the pipes.

  MRS. S. My son makes songs too--he’s a poet, you know; not that I
       can understand his poetry; it’s all Greek to me, but it amuses
       him, and that’s everything.

  WIDOW. He must be very clever. My grandfather was a fine poet.

  MRS. S. Oh! really. Sandy will be delighted. He’ll be sure to buy a
       copy of your grandfather’s book.

  WIDOW. There is no book: his songs were never put in a book, but
       everybody sings them from Reay to Lochaber.

  MRS. S. How interesting! I’m sure you will be very friendly with
       my son. Perhaps you will make more of him than I can. His
       manner is irritating to me, and we’re not very good friends at
       present.

  WIDOW. I hope he’s no’ taking the drink.

  MRS S. Oh, no! but the poor boy has a temperament.

  WIDOW. A bad temper?

  MRS S. No, he’s not bad tempered, but very moody, inclined to be
       melancholy at times. And he’s so unconventional. He wants to
       return to Nature, he says, and in trying to be natural he has
       grown quite eccentric. He’s not like an ordinary city man at
       all.

  WIDOW. Gentlemen are often strange in their ways. They have so
       little to do that they cannot help taking queer notions.

  MRS S. (_smiling_). Perhaps. He’s tiresome at home but he’s
       absolutely unbearable on a holiday; he won’t even dress
       himself decently. He makes one climb dreadful hills to see the
       sun setting or the moon rising, and is continually drawing
       one’s attention to the light falling here and there. He’s in
       love with Nature, of course.

  WIDOW. With whom did you say?

  MRS S. He’s in love with the country, the fine scenery, and so on.

  WIDOW. And why for no?... God’s beautiful world.

  MRS S. I admire the country very much in the summer. It’s so
       restful and sets one up so. But I can’t understand how you
       exist during the winter season in this solitary place.

  WIDOW. It’s as beautiful in winter as in summer. Many times I will
       be looking through the window there to see the moon rising
       over the loch on a winter’s night when the ground is white and
       sparkling and all the world is at peace. It is like a dream of
       Heaven.

  MRS S. You have an eye for the beautiful, Mrs Mackay; but you
       don’t always get moonlight nights and clear days in the
       winter. (_Shrugging her shoulders._)

  WIDOW. Every day is different and every day has its own beauty, mem.

  MRS S. You will get on splendidly with my son. I’m so glad I have
       come here. You set my mind at ease. I can quite see you will
       have a strong influence over him. So I had better let you into
       my little secret, and perhaps you will help me. My son is in
       love, Mrs Mackay, terribly in love. At least he thinks he is.

  WIDOW. Indeet!

  MRS S. I shouldn’t mind that so much. But he is in love with a
       girl far below him in rank. It worries me very much.

  WIDOW. I see.

  MRS S. (_confidentially_). Do you know he actually wanted to marry
       one of my servants--the tablemaid.

  WIDOW. Surely she must be a very attractive girl.

  MRS S. That’s it. A pretty girl, naturally refined, an excellent
       servant, but not a suitable wife for a rich husband. A foolish
       marriage would ruin my son’s social prospects. I could never
       hold up my head again if such a thing happened. So I had to
       put my foot down. I sent the girl away and told her my son had
       asked me to do so, but I told my son the girl had left of her
       own accord to free herself of his undesired attentions. It was
       a terrible thing to have to do.

  WIDOW. A very terrible thing, indeet, to be telling what was maybe
       not true.

  MRS S. Yes, it cost me a pang or two of conscience, but I knew
       it was for the best. The poor boy has suffered, but, as
       his sister says, he is recovering slowly. A spell of hard
       work will do him a lot of good. I hope you will help me by
       encouraging him to work, Mrs Mackay. Praise his work and keep
       him at it. Tell him he is improving every day. He likes to be
       praised. All artists and poets do; they live on praise or the
       hope of praise. They prefer praise to money, poor fellows.

  WIDOW. There are more desirable things in this world than money;
       all we require of it is just a little for our daily needs.

  MRS S. Which vary, of course. I hope you’ll do your best to help
       me, Mrs Mackay. I feel I can trust you.

  WIDOW. If I can do anything to help you, I’ll do it, I’m sure. But
       it’s little I can talk to him about, I’m afraid.

  MRS S. (_smiling_). Discuss his soul with him. He is great on his
       soul.

  WIDOW. I’m glad to hear that, mem, yes, I am indeet. I’ll speak to
       our new minister about him; he’s a very earnest lad.

  MRS S. I don’t quite mean that. When my son speaks about his soul,
       he means his artistic impulses or his affections, or, perhaps,
       his affectations. For instance, when he is painting a picture,
       he talks about painting his soul. He says his poetry is full
       of soul. And, do you know, he called that servant girl “the
       companion of his soul.”

  WIDOW (_sighs_). Ochone! It’s a terrible way to be speaking about
       his eternal soul. (_Rocks herself with clasped hands._)

  MRS S. Yes, rather absurd, isn’t it? We old-fashioned people keep
       our souls for our religious life, of course; for the church,
       not for the studio. But do not heed his little ways and his
       absurd remarks. Humour him and flatter him judiciously. That’s
       what I always do. (_Rises._) I think I’ll walk to the station
       to meet him. He’ll get a surprise to see me here. I want to be
       reconciled to the dear boy before I go on holiday myself. How
       far is it to the station, Mrs Mackay?

  WIDOW. It’s two miles round by the road, but there’s a short cut
       across the moor. (_Looking through the window._) If you will
       ask the postman, who is just coming, to show you the way,
       he’ll put you right. It’s just a little over half a mile to
       the station by the short cut.

  MRS S. Thank you so much. Good evening, Mrs Mackay. I’ll see you
       later on. (_Exit._)

  WIDOW. A nice lady, but one that’s needing to be spoken to very
       seriously about her own soul. I wonder what sort o’ minister
       she’ll be sitting under. She’s no’ afraid to be telling lies
       to her son and her servant for fear they will get married,
       and maybe they’ll be very fond of one another. It’s doing the
       devil’s work to come between young people in love; and if
       they’re meant for one another it’s no’ her or anybody else
       will keep them apart.... I wonder what Màiri will say when I
       tell her.... And, oh! dear me, Màiri will not be pleased with
       me. I never said a word about money. I never thought on such a
       thing. And worst of all, I never asked the lady her name. Am I
       no’ the stupid one?

  [_Motor horn sounds in the distance._]

       I wonder who that will be. The doctor, very likely. Somebody
       must be ill. (_Looking through the window._) It’s no’ the
       doctor, but a strange gentleman coming this way. It canna’ be
       the lady’s son, for he’s coming by train. This will be another
       veesitor, but he’s too late. I wish Màiri was here. I’m no’ fit
       to be speaking to the veesitors.

 [_Enter Sandy Speedwell._]

  WIDOW. Good day to you, sir, I’m ferry glad to see you, indeet. Will
       you be taking a chair?

  SANDY. I’m your lodger, Mrs Mackay. I had a wire from the Postmaster
      and motored here with a friend. This is a beautiful glen.

  WIDOW. I hope there’s no mistake. Will you be the gentleman who is a
      painter and a poet too?

  SANDY (_astonished_). Really you surprise me, madam. What little
      bird has been carrying tales about me? I thought I had reached
      the back of the world.

  WIDOW. A lady called here, sir, and was telling me. But----

  SANDY. A lady? What lady? (_Anxiously._) Your niece, your daughter,
      your cousin--who is she, what is she? A young lady or an old lady?

  WIDOW (_smiling_). No relation of mine, sir. You’ll soon be seeing
      her yourself. Maybe I’ll better go and tell her you are here.
      She’s neither young nor old, but somesing between the two.
      (_Aside._) I musn’t be telling him it was his own mother.

  SANDY. No, don’t go. I’m in no mood to meet any of my acquaintances.
      (_Aside._) Those prying gossips! One can’t go a step for them.
      (_Aloud._) I prefer to talk to yourself, Mrs Mackay, but I must
      ask you to do me a special favour.

  WIDOW. I’m at your service, sir.

  SANDY. _Don’t_ call me “sir.” My name is Sandy.

  WIDOW. Indeet. A very homely name indeet, _sir_--I beg your
      pardon--there will be one or two Sandys in this same glen already.

  SANDY. Splendid! I’ll be able to hide myself. If anybody calls here
      asking for Sandy, you’ll send them to some other Sandy....
      (_Gazes steadfastly at Mrs Mackay._) Look through the window,
      Mrs Mackay.

  WIDOW (_alarmed_). What is it?

  SANDY. Sit down, please, don’t move. You make an excellent picture.
      Just look towards the window. (_Widow looks nervously._) Ah!
      wonderful; she was Spring, you are late September. (_Sighs._) I
      must paint you.

  WIDOW (_astonished_). Paint me?

  SANDY. I will paint your portrait and present it to you afterwards.

  WIDOW (_aside_). Màiri said the veesitors were so kind to people.
      (_Aloud._) That’s very good of you, Mr----

  SANDY. Sandy.

  WIDOW. Mr Sandy.

  SANDY. No, simply Sandy. (_Laughs._) Simple Sandy, if you like, or
      just Sandy.

  Widow (_aside_). So simple and plain; he must be a born gentleman.
      (_Aloud._) I’ll be trying to remember. (_Smiles._)

  SANDY (_musingly_). What is there in you Highland people that makes
      you seem all alike, I wonder? When you smile, you remind me
      of--of someone I knew. A Highland lady also. (_Aside._) Ah! dear
      me, can I never get her out of my mind?--Màiri, Màiri, my soul
      calls you. You haunt me night and day. (_Aloud._) This is a very
      beautiful little house. What a rare window! And this fire-place!
      (_Sits down on a stool._)

  WIDOW. Take the easy chair, if you please. I’m sure you’re feeling
      tired.

  SANDY. Is that your most comfortable chair, Mrs Mackay?

  WIDOW (_stiffly_). Yes, it will be, but maybe by next year----

  SANDY. Then come and sit in it, please, and speak to me. I’m dull,
      madam. (_Sighs._)

  WIDOW (_pokes up the peat_). It’s a poor fire, indeet, and there’s
      nothing so cheery as a bright fire. I hope you’ll be excusing
      the old fire-place, but maybe by next year we’ll have a
      registered grate. (_Sits down._)

  SANDY. (_standing up_). Heavens! don’t speak about such a thing,
      never think of changing your grate. It’s perfect, madam.
      (_Smiles._) I must paint this fire-place, and you must sit
      beside it at your spinning wheel. (_Glances round the room._) I
      will give you some pictures to hide those on the wall--those
      frowning fellows--pah!

  WIDOW (_aside_). I must mind to be humouring him. (_Aloud._) You
      are too kind, indeet. But first I will give you something to
      eat. (_Rises._)

  SANDY. Sit down, Mrs Mackay. I’m not hungry. Please do not go away.
      (_Gazes in her face._) Do sit down. (_Aside._) How like Màiri
      she is. I seem to see Màiri everywhere, yet I cannot see her.

  WIDOW. I’m afraid you’ll have to be excusing me. I have to go for a
      little message, but I’ll not be long. I’m sure you will be
      excusing me, now.

  SANDY. I beg your pardon, Mrs Mackay. It’s selfish of me to detain
      you.

  WIDOW (_smiling._) I’ll soon be back. (_Aside._) I must hurry after
      his mother and tell her. The poor lad is eating out his heart
      because he has quarrelled with her. (_Aloud._) Be amusing
      yourself till I return, Mr Sandy--I mean Sandy. (_Aside._) I’ll
      better hurry and get back before Màiri comes. (_Exit._)

  SANDY (_Alone. Sits before the fire on the low stool. Elbows
      on knees and face between his hands._) I cannot escape Màiri.
      Everywhere I go I think of Màiri. (_Takes a sheet of notepaper
      from his pocket and reads_):

              Star of my soul, can I forget?
              I dreamed not that my star would set.
              Ah! now my heaven is dim and bare,
              Thou wert so bright, thou wert so fair--
              Dwells falsehood in such eyes as thine?
              Came poison from thy lips divine?
              My soul is----

       Pah! What mockery--jingling mockery!

 [_Flings his poem in the fire. As the flame leaps up the door opens
       and Màiri enters. Sandy looks round, utters an exclamation of
       surprise: stands up, faces Màiri. The lovers gaze at one
       another, amazed and silent for a few seconds._]

  SANDY. Màiri.... You?

  MÀIRI (_with emotion_). Why--why have you--have you followed
       me here?

  SANDY. I have been searching for you everywhere, but----

  MÀIRI. Oh! leave me alone. Why, why?--Have you seen my mother?
       Where is she?

  SANDY. She has just gone out, but will return soon.

  MÀIRI. I’ll go after her.

  SANDY (_strides forward and seizes Màiri’s hand_). Oh! do not
       leave me like that, Màiri. Will you not speak to me, if not
       for my own sake, at least for the sake of old times?

  MÀIRI. Why should you want to be speaking to me? Your mother
       told me what you said. Do you think I can forget so soon? Let
       me go....

  SANDY. Màiri, what do you mean? What did my mother tell you?

  MÀIRI. Ah! do not be fooling me. You may have fooled me in
       _your_ mother’s house, but you’ll never fool me in _my_
       mother’s house.

  SANDY. Fooling you? I don’t understand.... Is this your home,
       Màiri?

  MÀIRI (_raising herself stiffly_). Well you know whose house
       you are in. (_Drawing her hand away._) Now, leave it! and
       never darken our door again. I am not your servant any longer,
       sir.

  SANDY. If you ask me to go, I certainly will. But before I do,
       let me tell you this, Màiri: I have never asked my mother to
       say anything to you about me.

  MÀIRI. Perhaps not. But she told me all.... Are you going now?

  SANDY (_brokenly_). Màiri, do not break my heart. Do not spurn
       me, as if I were a leper. Oh, Màiri, if you must send me away,
       once again, let us part as friends.... Why, oh why, did you
       not tell me yourself that you had grown tired of me? Why did
       you ask my mother to repeat your cruel words?

  MÀIRI. Your mother? My cruel words? I never gave any message
       to your mother.

  SANDY. Never gave.... Has my mother lied to me?... When
       I returned from my holiday and found you had gone, I was
       broken-hearted, and what I felt most and feel most is that you
       never even left a letter for me. If only you had, I should
       have been better able to bear it....

  MÀIRI. I’ll just ask you one question before you go. What did
       you tell your mother to say to me?

  SANDY. Nothing! I never spoke to her about you after I told
       her we were engaged, until that black evening when she seared
       my soul with your message--the message she said you left for
       me.

  [_Màiri sinks in a chair, covers her eyes with her hand, and
       sobs._]

  SANDY. Màiri, Màiri, I love you more than ever. Forgive
       me if I have offended you! Have pity on me! I have never
       loved another. I will never love another. (_Kneels before
       her._) If you cannot love me, do not despise me. If you wish
       me to go away, do not let us part except as old friends.
       (_Entreatingly._) Màiri, speak to me, Màiri.

  [_Màiri suddenly takes his head in her hands and kisses his
       forehead._]

  SANDY. My love, I cannot leave you now.

  [_They gaze at one another in silence._]

  MÀIRI. Then it is not true that you wished to leave me?

  SANDY. No, no, Màiri. And it’s not true that you had grown
       tired of me?

  MÀIRI. Tired of you, Sandy? The heart of me has been hungering
       for you day and night since last we parted.

       [_Voices are heard outside._]

  SANDY. Your mother is coming. (_Looks through the window._)
       Heavens! my mother is with her.

  MÀIRI. Your mother?... Oh! let me hide myself.

  SANDY. I don’t wish to see her either. I shall never speak to her
       again. Where can we go?

  MÀIRI. To the kitchen. We can slip out after they come in here.

  [_Exit Sandy and Màiri. Enter Mrs Mackay supporting Mrs Speedwell,
       who is limping; she has met with an accident and is slightly
       hysterical._]

  WIDOW. Be sitting down, mem. Try to compose yourself.

  MRS S. Thank you, Mrs Mackay, you are so kind--oh! dear, dear,
       where is my son?

  WIDOW. He must have gone out to look at the scenery. He’ll soon be
       back, I’m sure. Just you settle down nicely now, mem. I’ll
       bathe your foot for you. I’ll better be putting the big kettle
       on the kitchen fire. (_Exit. Voices heard within_....) Are
       _you_ here, Màiri dear? And Mr Sandy, too?

  MRS S. (_starting_). Sandy and Màiri. Can it be?----

  WIDOW (_re-enters_). I’m sorry, mem, but--but (_with agitation_) I
       cannot understand--your son refuses to come in.

  MRS S. (_rising_). Then I will go to my son.

  [_Limps towards the door, sees her son and Màiri._]

  MRS S. Sandy ... Màiri ... come here--come here at once. Do not go
       out and leave me in misery. I wish to speak to you both.

  [_Sandy and Màiri enter. Both look stern and defiant._]

  MRS S. Let me sit down. I want to speak to my son and Màiri.

  [_Widow assists her towards the arm-chair._]

  WIDOW (_addressing her daughter_). Is this your young man, Màiri
       dear?

  MÀIRI (_hiding her face in Sandy’s arm_). Yes, mother (_faintly_).

  WIDOW (_nervously_). I think I will better be putting the big
       kettle on the kitchen fire. (_Walks towards the door._)

  MRS S. No, no, come back; please sit down, Mrs Mackay. I wish you
       to hear all I have got to say.

  [_Mrs Mackay sits opposite Mrs Speedwell, who is in the “easy
       chair.” Sandy and Màiri stand beside the table, arm in arm._]

  MRS S. (_addressing Mrs Mackay_). When you found me lying
       helplessly on the moor, my sprained ankle sinking into a
       bog, I thanked you and you said, “It’s not me you should be
       thanking, but Providence.” You were right there, Mrs Mackay.
       The hand of Providence arranges all things. Providence brought
       me here to be punished for my sin; Providence brought these
       two together (_pointing to Sandy and Màiri_) at the same
       time.... When I was lying on that dreadful lonely moor,
       expecting to meet an awful death--to die there alone--the
       thoughts that were uppermost in my mind were about my sin
       against your daughter and my own son. Now I am going to ask
       their forgiveness.

  SANDY (_impulsively, hastening towards her_). No, no. Don’t ask my
       forgiveness (_kisses her_), but Màiri’s only.

  MRS S. (_turning to Màiri_). Màiri dear (_entreatingly and
       softly_).

  [_Sandy goes towards Màiri and leads her to his mother._]

  MRS S. Kiss me, my ... daughter.

  [_Sandy grasps Mrs Mackay’s hand. The old woman rises to her feet._]

  SANDY (_gleefully_). My mother has robbed you of your daughter. Let
       me take her place and be your son.

  WIDOW (_with emotion_). Be you a good man to _my_ Màiri, for _my_
       Màiri has been a good daughter to me.

  [_Màiri comes forward and kisses her mother._]

  SANDY (_taking Màiri’s arm_). Come on! hurry, hurry! Let us boil
       the big kettle on the kitchen fire.

  [_Màiri smiles radiantly and Mrs Speedwell laughs. The widow sinks
       into a chair._]

  MRS S. Dear Mrs Mackay, but for my sore foot I think I would dance
       to you. (_Màiri and Sandy turn at the door and laugh. The
       widow smiles._)


                              (CURTAIN)


     [1] pron. Mah’ri.

     [2] chill.

     [3] nothing.

     [4] pron. mai’tl, _Gael._, my treasure.




Transcriber’s Note:

Words may have multiple spelling variations or inconsistent
hyphenation in the text and were not changed. Jargon, dialect,
obsolete, and alternative spellings were not changed. Inconsistent
punctuation after "Mrs" was not changed.

Words and phrases in italics are surrounded by underscores, _like
this_. Footnotes were renumbered sequentially and were moved to the
end of the book.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE REAL MACKAY ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

